Title: It is dark before dawn

Non-classical logics constitute a huge collection of tools for representation and reasoning within domains that require expansion or restriction, in some or other way, of the formal principles usually employed in the mathematical fields. Intuitionistic, modal, and more broadly, non-monotonic logics are examples of such tools that are longer known and studied within Philosophy, Mathematics, and also Computer Science. Their adequacy for reasoning about problems in different areas have been advocated for many years, as they capture more precisely the nuances intrinsically related to the problems within those areas. Applications of interest range from theoretical foundations of Mathematics to engineering problems: those logics can be used to represent and reason about computations, conflicting information, provability, temporality, epistemology, defeasible information, normative reasoning, vagueness,... The list goes on and on.

The development of non-classical logics is needed if we intend to deal with complex problems in a complex world. Although, some logics are well understood, with well stablished model and proof theories, it seems that there is still a lot to do with respect to the automation of the reasoning tasks for those logics. There are, of course, tools for many non-classical logics. Their existence, however, seems to rely on individual efforts of researchers and their groups whilst we can observe a more systematic approach to the construction and maintanance of reasoners for classical logics: standards are in place, provers can talk to each other (with little effort), and those provers are under constant scrutiny of the community, which allows for both the easier adaptation and incorporation of implementation techniques and also their correctness and realiability.

The implementation of non-classical provers may require sophisticated techniques, not always adaptable from the classical approaches, in order to rightly and efficiently deal with the kind of reasoning that reflects their often complex semantical counterparts. Every different logic may require very different techniques, and there are too many of such logics. The effort employed to communicate proofs or other certificates between provers, even when considering closely related systems, is significant. The same goes for the evaluation and comparison between provers: Some prover do not have competitors, benchmarks are not available, and there are very few standards (those are usually restricted to "popular" logics). 

"Stepping into the dark side" may translate well the perception that this list of difficulties is as an impediment to the development of reasoner tools for non-classical logics. As we argued in the topical session of which we had the honour to be invited to host last CADE, our vision is that their applicability should help us to surpass the existing problems and, actually, shed light into the challenges that we need to face to provide a good reasoning service for those intended applications. It is dark before dawn, but there seems to be interest enough to fostering collaboration between implementers, for proactively planning and working on minimising the existing problems, and stepping towards the light side: those challenges (and fun) that are intrinsically related to particular domains and logics themselves.

-- I think we should add notes about what people said in the topical session, but there are more questions than answers there. Well, and no conclusion.

-- add something about explainable AI?


